## Chapter 3: Deeper Dive on the MongoDB Query Language

Query operators: element operators, logical operators, array operators, and the regex operator

For which CRUD operations can one use the query operators we will discuss in this chapter? **ALL of them**.

Given that _upserts_ are a form of create operation, all CRUD operations can make use of a filter. The query operators we are going to discuss in this chapter are used in filters.

#### Comparison Operators

Filter for all movies with a `runtime` greater than 90 minutes.

```
db.movieDetails.find({runtime: {$gt: 90}})
```

For `runtime` greater than 90 minutes and less than 120 minutes:

```
db.movies.find({runtime: { $gt: 90, $lt: 120 }})
```

For `runtime` greater than _or equal to_ 90 minutes and less than _or equal to_ 120 minutes (with projection):

```
db.movieDetails.find({runtime: {$gte: 90, $lte: 120}}, {_id: 0, title: 1, runtime: 1})
```

Mixing things up...

```
db.movieDetails.find({runtime: {$gte: 180}, "tomato.meter": 95}, {_id: 0, title: 1, runtime: 1})
```

Filtering on _not equal_ (`$ne`). Example: finding movies whos rating is anything other than 'UNRATED':

```
db.movieDetails.find({rated: {$ne: "UNRATED"}}, {_id: 0, title: 1, rated: 1})
```

filtering on one or more values, any one of which will cause a document to be returned: `$in`. The value of `$in` must be an array. Select all documents where the value of `rated` is "G" or "PG":

```
db.movieDetails.find({rated: {$in: ["G", "PG"]}}, {_id: 0, title: 1, rated: 1})
```

Extend the filter by adding more elements to the array:

```
db.movieDetails.find({rated: {$in: ["G", "PG", "PG-13"]}}, {_id: 0, title: 1, rated: 1}).pretty()
```

The oppose it `$nin` - _not in_:

```
db.movieDetails.find({rated: {$nin: ["R"]}}, {_id: 0, title: 1, rated: 1}).pretty()
```

#### Element Operators

Test for the existence of a rating:

```
db.moviesDetails.find({mpaaRating: {$exists: true}})
```

Match documents that do NOT contain a `mpaaRating` key:

```
db.moviesDetails.find({mpaaRating: {$exists: false}})
```

Find documents that either have `mpaaRating: null` or do not contain the `mpaaRating` key at all:

```
db.movieDetails.find({mpaaRating: null})
```

Filter for documents that have a particular value type for a field using the `$type` operator. For example, match only document that have a value type for `viewerRating` that is a 32-bit integer:

```
db.movies.find({viewerRating: {$type: "int"}}).pretty()
```

Or look for just doubles instead:

```
db.movies.find({viewerRating: {$type: "double"}}).pretty()
```

#### Logical Operators

Focus on `$or` and `$and`. There's also `$not` and `$nor` operators.

`$or` takes an array in which we specify selectors. Any one of which can be true to match a query.

Example of `$or`. Look for docs based on their rating using both their tomato meter and the metacritic score. We're looking for docs with a tomato.meter greater than 95 and a metacritic score greater than 88:

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { $or: [
    { "tomato.meter" : { $gt : 95 }},
    { "metacritic"   : { $gt : 88 }}
  ]},
  { _id: 0, title: 1, "tomato.meter": 1, "metacritic": 1}
)
```

`$and` - _both_ conditions must be true. Selectors in a filter are implicitly anded together by default.

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { $and: [
    { "tomato.meter" : { $gt : 95 }},
    { "metacritic"   : { $gt : 88 }}
  ]},
  { _id : 0, title : 1, "tomato.meter" : 1, "metacritic" : 1}
)
```

... is the same as ...

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { "tomato.meter" : { $gt : 95 },
    "metacritic"   : { $gt : 88 }
  },
  { _id : 0, title : 1, "tomato.meter" : 1, "metacritic" : 1 }
  )
```

So why is there a `$and` operator? It allows us to apply multiple constraints on the same field. What if we want to check that both `metacritic` exists and it not set to `null`:

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { $and : [
    { "metacritic" : { $ne     : null }},
    { "metacritic" : { $exists : true }}
  ]},
  { _id : 0, title : 1, "metacritic" : 1 }
)
```

Flip that - find all documents where `metacritic` exists _and_ is set to `null`:

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { $and : [
    { "metacritic" : null },
    { "metacritic" : { $exists : true }}
  ]},
  { _id: 0, title : 1, "metacritic" : 1 }
)
```

In our class Atlas cluster, ships.shipwrecks collection... `watlev` describes the water level at the shipwreck site and `depth` describes how far below sea level the ship rests. How many documents in the `ships.shipwrecks` collection match either of the following criteria: `watlev` equal to "always dry" or `depth` equal to 0?

```
db.shipwrecks.find(
  {
    $or : [
      { watlev : 'always dry' },
      { depth  : 0 }
    ]
  }
).count()
```

#### Array Operators: $all

$all matches array fields against an array of elements. To match, all the elements we're looking for must be in the array field. Order isn't important.

`$all` takes an array.

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { genres: { $all: [ "Comedy", "Crime", "Drama" ] } },
  { _id : 0, title : 1, genres : 1}
)
```

In the class Atlas cluster, `100YWeatherSmall.data` collection, The `sections` field in this collection identifies supplementary readings available in a given document by a three-character code. How many documents list: "AG1", "MD1", and "OA1" among the codes in their sections array. Your count should include all documents that include these three codes regardless of what other codes are also listed.

```
db.data
  .find({ sections: { $all: ['AG1', 'MD1', 'OA1'] }})
  .count()
```

#### Array Operators: $size

Use `$size` to match documents based on the length of an array. For example, the `countries` field lists all the countries a movie was filmed in. To find films that were filmed in just one country, we look for `counties` of size = 1:

```
db.movieDetails
  .find({ countries : { $size : 1 } })
```

#### Array Operators: $elemMatch

```
boxOffice: [ { "country": "USA", "revenue": 228.4 },
             { "country": "Australia", "revenue": 19.6 },
             { "country": "UK", "revenue": 33.9 },
             { "country": "Germany", "revenue": 16.2 },
             { "country": "France", "revenue": 19.8 } ]

db.movieDetails.find({"boxOffice.country": "Germany", "boxOffice.revenue": {$gt: 17}})

db.movieDetails.find({"boxOffice.country": "Germany", "boxOffice.revenue": {$gt: 228}})

use video
martian = db.movieDetails.findOne({title: "The Martian"})
martian
delete martian._id;
martian
martian.boxOffice = [
    {"country": "USA", "revenue": 228.4},
    {"country": "Australia", "revenue": 19.6},
    {"country": "UK", "revenue": 33.9},
    {"country": "Germany", "revenue": 16.2},
    {"country": "France", "revenue": 19.8}
]
db.movieDetails.insertOne(martian);

db.movieDetails.find({boxOffice: {$elemMatch: {"country": "Germany", "revenue": {$gt: 17}}}})

db.movieDetails.find({boxOffice: {$elemMatch: {"country": "Germany", "revenue": {$gt: 16}}}})
```

The M001 class Atlas cluster has a database called results. Within this database you will find two collections: `surveys` and `scores`. Documents in the `results.surveys` collection have the following schema.

```
{_id: ObjectId("5964e8e5f0df64e7bc2d7373"),
  results: [
    { product: "abc", score: 10 },
    { product: "xyz", score: 9 }
  ]
}
```

The field called `results` that has an array as its value. This array contains survey results for products and lists the product name and the survey score for each product.

How many documents in the `results.surveys` collection contain a score of 7 for the product, "abc"?

```
db.surveys.find({ results: { $elemMatch : {'score': 7, 'product': 'abc' } } }).count()
```

#### Regex Operator

`$regex` allows us to use regular expressions. In the `movieDetails` collection, documents have an `awards` subdocument with a `text` field. The text in that field tends to start with "Won " if the movie won an Oscar, for ex. If we want to search for movies that 'Won', we:  

```
db.movieDetails.find(
  { "awards.text" : { $regex: /^Won.* / } },
  {_id: 0, title: 1, "awards.text": 1}
)
```

The carat `^` means start at the beginning of a string. The `.` means match any character, and the `*` means match any character any number of times. Basically, we don't care about what comes after the word `Won`. And we want a space after 'Won '.

#### Chapter 3 Quiz / Challenge Problem: Single Value in an Array of Integers

In the M001 class Atlas cluster, `results` database, there are two collections: `surveys` and `scores`.

Documents in the `results.scores` collection have the following schema.

```
{
  "_id": ObjectId("5964e8e5f0df64e7bc2d7373"),
  "results": [75, 88, 89]
}
```

How many documents in the `results.scores` collection contain a single score in the results array that is greater than or equal to 70 and less than 80?

```
db.scores.find({
  results: {
    $elemMatch: { $gte: 70, $lt: 80 }
  }
}).count()
```

#### Final Exam

>Connect to our class Atlas cluster from Compass and view the citybike.trips collection. Use the schema view and any filters you feel are necessary to determine the range of values for the usertype field. Which of the following are values found in this collection for the field usertype?

```
// should return zero results. Customer and Subscriber = 100% possible values
{
  $nor : [
    { "usertype" : "Customer" },
    { "usertype" : "Subscriber" }
  ]
}
```

>Connect to our class Atlas cluster from Compass and view the 100YWeatherSmall.data collection. Using the Schema view, explore the wind field. The wind field has the value type of document. Which of the following best describes the schema of this embedded document?

A: Three fields: two with value type `document` and one with value type `string`

>Connect to the M001 class Atlas cluster from Compass and view the 100YWeatherSmall.data collection. What is the value type of the "wind.speed.rate" field?

A: double

>Please connect to the M001 class Atlas cluster. You may answer this question using either the mongo shell or Compass.

>For this question we will use the citibike database.

>How many documents in the citibike.trips collection have the key tripduration set to null? Ignore any documents that do not contain the tripduration key.

```
// answer: 2
db.trips.find(
  { $and : [
    { "tripduration" : null },
    { "tripduration" : { $exists : true }}
  ]}
).count()
```

>Using the video.movieDetails collection, which of the queries below would produce output documents that resemble the following. Check all that apply.

> { "title" : "P.S. I Love You" }
  { "title" : "Love Actually" }
  { "title" : "Shakespeare in Love" }

>NOTE: We are not asking you to consider specifically which documents would be output from the queries below, but rather what fields the output documents would contain.

```
// the solution must use projection to exclude _id and include title
db.movieDetails.find({year: 1964},{_id:0, title:1}).pretty()
```

>Please connect to the M001 class Atlas cluster from the mongo shell or Compass and view the video.movies collection. How many movies match the following criteria?

>* The cast includes either of the following actors: "Jack Nicholson", "John Huston".
>* The viewerRating is greater than 7.
>* The mpaaRating is "R".

```
// A: 8
db.movies.find({
  $and: [
    {$or: [{cast: "Jack Nicholson"}, {cast: "John Huston"} ]},
    {viewerRating: {$gt: 7}},
    {mpaaRating: "R"}
  ]
}).count()
```
