## Chapter 2: the MongoDB Query Language + Atlas

#### Intro to CRUD

We'll be using the Mongo shell, a text-based MongoDB client.

#### Installing the mongo shell

Compass doesn't yet support the full MongoDB query language.

Shannon recommends installing MongoDB Enterprise Server.

From:
https://www.mongodb.com/lp/download/mongodb-enterprise?jmp=hero#enterprise

>MongoDB Enterprise Server is free of charge for evaluation and development.

Shannon suggests

1.  downloading the server and extracting the files to `~/`
2.  creating a `~/.bash_profile` file to add the above path our PATH variables
    Add (for example)

    ```
    export PATH="~/mongodb-linux-x86_64-enterprise-ubuntu1604-3.4.9/bin:$PATH"
    ```

    That adds the mongodb download folder's /bin location at the front of our PATH variables. Meaning bash will look for executables there first, before looking through the rest of $PATH. Why? So that our enterprise binaries are found before any other installed versions of Mongo.
3.  Update bash using this terminal command

    ```
    source ~/.bash_profile
    ```
4.  Check that it works by trying to launch the mongo client:

    ```
    $ mongo --nodb
    ```

#### Connecting to Our Class Atlas Cluster

```
mongo "mongodb://cluster0-shard-00-00-jxeqq.mongodb.net:27017,cluster0-shard-00-01-jxeqq.mongodb.net:27017,cluster0-shard-00-02-jxeqq.mongodb.net:27017/test?replicaSet=Cluster0-shard-0" --authenticationDatabase admin --ssl --username m001-student --password m001-mongodb-basics
```

Class DB is a three DB replicaset to ensure we all have access to our data. The above command lists the three servers.

Replica sets are designed so that if the primary node goes down, one of the other nodes will step up to take its place so that clients can continue reading and writing data as if nothing had happened. The mongo shell is one such client.

More info on replica sets:

https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/

We can change the database we're interested in. Above, we connect to `test`. In Shannon's lecture, he changes this to `100YWeatherSmall`.

WHen we run that command, we'll get a bunch of output. Additionally, the shell will tell us what we've connected to. For example, the PRIMARY:

```
MongoDB server version: 3.4.9
Cluster0-shard-0:PRIMARY>
```

There can be only one PRIMARY in any cluster. Only PRIMARIES can accept writes. All other shards can handle reads.

Some commands:

* `show dbs` - list the databases in the cluster

* `show collections` - list the collections in a database

* `use <database>` - switch to a different <database>

### Creating an Atlas Sandbox Cluster

In CRUD, Create Update and Delete are "write" operations. We only have read access to the class Atlas cluster. So we have to make a sandbox cluster.

To begin creating an Atlas Sandbox cluster, visit

https://cloud.mongodb.com/links/registerForAtlas

and complete the account creation form you see on that page.

Sandbox cluster
username: m001-student
password: m001-mongodb-basics

Don't use connection string! We'll use the 'connect via mongo SHELL' commands.

```
mongo "mongodb://sandbox-shard-00-00-i56n7.mongodb.net:27017,sandbox-shard-00-01-i56n7.mongodb.net:27017,sandbox-shard-00-02-i56n7.mongodb.net:27017/test?replicaSet=Sandbox-shard-0" --authenticationDatabase admin --ssl --username m001-student --password m001-mongodb-basics
```

#### Loading Data Into Our Sandbox Cluster

The mongo shell is a full-featured JS environent. We can run JS files. Use the mongo shell `load()` command to execute a JS file. For the course, we downloaded Shannon's big _insert_ file and ran:

```
load(loadMovieDetailsDataset.js);
```

#### Connecting to our Sandbox Cluster using Compass:

Look at the cluster view in Atlas. Click on it. Then find the PRIMARY. Need to get the primary's host name. So click on the primary. This will show you the hostname. Mine is

```
sandbox-shard-00-00-i56n7.mongodb.net
```

Copy that and paste it into Compass hostname field. For 'auth' select "username and password" and input our credentials (see above). That should be enough - click connect.

#### Creating documents: insertOne()

First, Shannon has us create a new collection using Compass: "moviesScratch".

Then in mongo shell, change to the appropriate database (`use video`) and call `insertOne` on the new collection, passing an object as the argument.

```
db.moviesScratch.insertOne({title: "Star Trek IV: The Wrath of Khan", year: 1982, imdb: "tt0084726"})
```

#### Creating multiple documents: insertMany()

Takes an array of objects. For example:

```
db.moviesScratch.insertMany(
    [
        {
	    "imdb" : "tt0084726",
	    "title" : "Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan",
	    "year" : 1982,
	    "type" : "movie"
        },
        {
	    "imdb" : "tt0796366",
	    "title" : "Star Trek",
	    "year" : 2009,
	    "type" : "movie"
        },
        {
	    "_id" : "tt0084726",
	    "title" : "Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan",
	    "year" : 1982,
	    "type" : "movie"
        },
        {
	    "imdb" : "tt1408101",
	    "title" : "Star Trek Into Darkness",
	    "year" : 2013,
	    "type" : "movie"
        },
        {
	    "imdb" : "tt0117731",
	    "title" : "Star Trek: First Contact",
	    "year" : 1996,
	    "type" : "movie"
        }
    ]
);
```

This example illustrates an error condition - two records have the same `_id` (and other things - they're identical docs). Mongo will throw a "duplicate key" error.

`insertMany()` is an **ordered insert** meaning it will stop as soon as it encounters an error. For the above `insertMany()` only 2 docs were inserted because it encoutered an error on the 3rd.

We might want our app to keep going when encountering an error. To support this use case, we can supply a 2nd argument to the `insertMany()`. The first argument is still an array of document objects. THe 2nd argument is itself a document, and just says `{ "ordered": false }`, like so:

```
db.moviesScratch.insertMany(
    [
      { /*documents*/}
    ],
    {
      "ordered": false
    }
);
```

#### Reading Documents: Scalar Fields

We've already used equality filters. Selectors in MongoDB queries are ANDed together. For example (in Compass):

```
{ "mpaaRating" : "PG-13", year: 2009 }
```

This same type of query in the mongo shell, we'd first `use video` and then call find on our movies collection.

```
db.moviesScratch.find({ "mpaaRating" : "PG-13", year: 2009 }).pretty()
```

Using equality operators for embedded docs.

You just string field names together using dot notation. In Compass, you don't have to wrap the `dot.notation.field.name` in quotes. But you do have to in the shell.

```
db.data.find({ "wind.direction.angle": 290 })
```

We can count docs by chaining the `count()` method after a `find()` query. For example, if we want to know how many movies in the movieDetails collection in our  sandbox cluster have exactly 2 award wins and 2 award nominations, we issue:

```
db.movieDetails.find({ "awards.nominations": 2, "awards.wins": 2 }).count()
```

How many movies in the movieDetails collection are rated PG and have exactly 10 award nominations?

```
db.movieDetails.find({ "rated": "PG", "awards.nominations" : 10 }).count()
```

#### Exact Matches for Array Fields

When finding values in arrays, matches are exact matches. Matching documents must have a value that is an exact match to the array we search for. For example, using the class cluster, `video` database

```
db.movies.find({cast: ['Jeff Bridges', 'Tim Robbins']})
```

That will return only documents containing both elements (and no more) in the order specified in the query. If a movie included those two cast members in addition to others, its document would not be returned.

More commonly we want to filter for a single element in an array field. We do this like this:

```
db.movies.find({cast: 'Jeff Bridges' })
```

Note that we did not wrap the query in [array] brackets. Matching docs contain the array element. It doesn't matter where in the array the value is found.

We can search for array values in specific positions / indexes using dot notation. For example, if we want to find all documents where Jeff Bridges is listed in the first position of the 'cast' array (because he's the leading actor), we'd use:

```
db.movies.find({ 'cast.0' : 'Jeff Bridges' })
```

#### Cursors

The `find()` method returns a **cursor**. A cursor is a pointer to a current location in a results set. For queries that return more than just a few docs, mongodb will return results in batches to our client. We use a cursor in our client to iterate through results. In the shell the cursor is automatically iterated up to 20 times, to print an initial set of search results.

So when a query is issued, the server returns a cursor to the shell, and the shell requests the next item from the results set 20 times.

If there are more results, iterating the cursor will trigger a get more operation to retrieve the next batch of results. In this way we can iterate through an entire set of search results.

The shell provides a convenience: after the first 20 results we can look at more of them by typing `it` (short of for 'iterate') which will give us the next 20 results.

#### Projections

Limiting the fields that are returned in results documents. By default, all fields are returned. Define projections in the 2nd argument to the find method.

```
db.movies.find({genre: "Action, Adventure"}, {title: 1})
```

Technically, the above returns the `title` AND the `_id`. Because `_id` is returned in all projections unless we explicitly exclude it:

```
db.movies.find({genre: "Action, Adventure"}, { title : 1, _id : 0 })
```

Excluding a bunch of fields:

```
db.movies.find({genre: 'Action, Adventure'}, {viewerRating:0, viewerVotes:0, runtime: 0})
```

#### Updating Documents

Updating a single Documents. First specify a filter to match documents. Just like `find()`. If there are more than 1 matching documents, only the 1st document would be updated here.

The 2nd argument specifies how we want to update the document. **You must apply an update operator**. In the following query, `$set` will add or replace the `poster` field and populate it with the URL.

```
db.movieDetails.updateOne({
  title: "The Martian"
}, {
  $set: {
    poster: "http://ia.media-imdb.com/images/M/MV5BMTc2MTQ3MDA1Nl.jpg"
  }
})
```

We can `$set` various types of fields. For instance:

```
db.movieDetails.updateOne({
  title: "The Martian"
}, {
  $set: {
    "awards": {
      "wins" : 8,
      "nominations": 14,
      "text": "Nominated for 3 Golden Globes. Another 8 wins & 14 nominations."
    }
  }
})
```

### Update Operators

https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/update/

`$set` adds or replaces a field

`$unset` - removes the field from a document

`$min` / `$max` - update a field by comparing with other values

`$inc` - increments a field by the specified value. For example:

```
db.movieDetails.updateOne({
  title: "The Martian"
}, {
  $inc: {
    "tomato.reviews": 3,
    "tomato.userReviews": 25  
  }
})
```

Updating arrays...

`$addToSet` - add an item to an array only if it isn't already in the array.

`$push` - add an element to an array, creating the array if it doesn't already exist.

```
let reviewText = "Blah blah blah...";
db.movieDetails.updateOne({
  title: "The Martian"
}, {
  $push: {
    reviews: {
      rating: 4.5,
      date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
      reviewer: "Spencer H.",
      text: reviewText
    }
  }
});
```

What about pushing more than one element? We have to use `$each` operator inside the `$push`. Otherwise, `$push` adds the whole array to the existing array as a single element.

```
db.movieDetails.updateOne({
  title: "The Martian"
}, {
  $push: {
    reviews: {
      $each: [{
        rating: 4.5,
        date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
        reviewer: "Spencer H.",
        text: "reviewText2"
      },{
        rating: 4.0,
        date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
        reviewer: "Jimmy J.",
        text: "reviewText3"
      },{
        rating: 5.0,
        date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
        reviewer: "Kelly K.",
        text: "reviewText4"
      },{
        rating: 4.5,
        date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
        reviewer: "Spencer H.",
        text: "reviewText5"
      },{
        rating: 4.0,
        date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
        reviewer: "Jimmy J.",
        text: "reviewText6"
      },{
        rating: 5.0,
        date: ISODate("2016-01-12T09:00:00Z"),
        reviewer: "Kelly K.",
        text: "reviewText7"
      }]
    }
  }
});
```

#### Updating multiple Documents

`updateMany()` - updates all documents that match specified criteria.

We often want to do some data cleaning operation. For example, updating all documents where `rated` is `null`, removing that field completely.

```
db.movieDetails.updateMany({
  rated: null
}, {
  $unset: {
    rated: ""
  }
})
```

#### Upserts

Upserts create documents during update operations if they don't already exist. Update a document if found, otherwise insert a new document into the collection.

To do this, we pass a third argument to, for example, `updateOne()`:

```
db.movieDetails.updateOne({
  "imdb.id": some_id_value  // filter
}, {
  $set: some_detail         // update
}, {
  upsert: true              // options
})
```

#### Replacing documents

`replaceOne()` - sometimes it may be simpler to replace an entire document than maintaining fields to make an `updateOne` method call.

Remember, mongo shell is a JS environment.

```
detailDoc = db.movieDetails.findOne({"imdb.id":"tt4368814"});

detailDoc.poster;  // null

detailDoc.poster = http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4368814/mediaviewer/rm2926634240";

detailDoc.genres;  // null

detailDoc.genres.push("Documentary");

db.movieDetails.replaceOne({"imdb.id": detailDoc.imdb.id }, detailDoc );
```

#### Delete Operations

`deleteOne()`

`deleteMany()`

In both cases, the 1st argument to each method is a filter that we're using to identify the document or documents that we want to delete.

Deleting a single document is usually best done by filtering for its `_id`:

```
db.reviews.deleteOne({_id: ObjectId("59ed5519fb7a9b9d997dc6a8")});
```

Deleting multiple documents:

```
db.reviews.deleteMany({ reviewer_id: 759723314 });
```
